El Architecture & El-specs (open for collaboration) (#60)
eth-protocol-fellows/protocol-studies: docs/wiki/EL/el-specs.md

> - [Python Execution Layer specification](https://ethereum.github.io/execution-specs/)
> - EIPs [Look at Readme of the repo](https://github.com/ethereum/execution-specs)

The core of the Ethereum Execution Layer is tasked with executing three types of transactions: legacy, Type 1, and Type 2. These transactions are processed by the quasi-Turing complete Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM), which allows for virtually any computation, bounded only by gas constraints. This capability positions the EVM as a decentralized world computer, enabling decentralized applications (DApps) to run and transactions to be securely recorded on an immutable ledger. Beyond transaction processing, the EL is instrumental in storing data structures within the State DB. This not only facilitates the observation of current and historical states but also supports the Consensus Layer in block creation and validation. In this analogy, the Execution Layer acts as the CPU, with the Consensus Layer serving as the hard drive. Additionally, the EL defines the parameters of Ethereum's economic model, laying the foundation for blockchain operations.

> 

Reviewer: One quick comment - please, standardize spaces between paragraphs. Sometimes you leave one, two or three new lines between headers and new paragraphs. Let's keep the same in whole doc with 1 dividing new line between paragraphs or headers

# Execution Layer Specifications

> **Where is it specified?**
>

> > - [Yellow Paper paris version 705168a – 2024-03-04](https://ethereum.github.io/yellowpaper/paper.pdf) (note: This is outdated does not take into account post merge updates)

Reviewer: Yellowpaper is getting updated but less regularly. Unless you are pointing to a specific commit in some context, the reference doesn't have to be specific 
```suggestion
> - [Yellow Paper](https://ethereum.github.io/yellowpaper/paper.pdf) (note: Yellow paper gets updated less regularly and might be outdated)
```

> - [Python Execution Layer specification](https://ethereum.github.io/execution-specs/)
> - EIPs [Look at Readme of the repo](https://github.com/ethereum/execution-specs)

> 

Reviewer: Maybe also include execution-apis and networking specs?

<img src="images/el-architecture/state.png" width="800"/>

The id's in the above image as represented in the yellow paper(paris version) :

| Id. | equation no. | yellow paper                                               | comments                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| ---------- | ------------ | ---------------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | 1          | 7            | $$TRIE(L_I^*(\sigma[a]_s)) \equiv \sigma[a]_s $$           | This gives the root of the account storage Trie ,$ \sigma[a]_s $ on the right, after mapping each node with the function $L_I((k,v)) \equiv (KEC(k), RLP(v))$ . The equation on the left is referring to mapping over underlying key and values of the account storage $ \sigma[a]_s $ these are two different objects the left $ \sigma[a]_s $ and the right $ \sigma[a]_s $ which represents the root hash |

Reviewer: wrong spacing, the symbols won't render. Also in rest of the table, check it out
```suggestion
| 1          | 7            | $$TRIE(L_I^*(\sigma[a]_s)) \equiv \sigma[a]_s $$           | This gives the root of the account storage Trie, $\sigma[a]_s$ on the right, after mapping each node with the function $L_I((k,v)) \equiv (KEC(k), RLP(v))$ . The equation on the left is referring to mapping over underlying key and values of the account storage $\sigma[a]_s$ these are two different objects the left $\sigma[a]_s$ and the right $\sigma[a]_s$ which represents the root hash |
```

4. **Block Execution**: Execute the transactions within the block, which yields the following outputs:
   - **Gas Used**: The total gas consumed by executing all transactions in the block.
   - **Trie Roots**: The roots of the tries for all transactions and receipts contained in the block.
   - **Logs Bloom**: A bloom filter of logs from all transactions within the block.
   - **State**: The state, as specified in the python execution specs, after executing all transactions.
5. **Header Parameters Verification**: Confirm that the parameters returned from executing the block are present in the block header. This includes comparing the state's root with the `state_root` field in the block header.
6. **Block Addition**: If all checks are successful, append the block to the blockchain.
7. **Pruning Old Blocks**: Remove blocks that are older than the most recent 255 blocks from the blockchain.
8. **Error Handling**: If any validation checks fail, raise an "Invalid Block" error. Otherwise, return None.

Client Code :

> | function | EELS(cancun) | Geth | Reth | Erigon | Nethermind | Besu |

Reviewer: This is pretty cool, I would like to have this table filled for each implementation. However, I think this section more fits in the architecture doc and here I would just focuse on EELS.

|----------|------|------|--------|------------|------|-----|
| Block Level  STF |    | Header verification begins here:  [insertChain]( https://github.com/ethereum/go-ethereum/blob/38eb8b3e20bf237a78fa57e84fa63c2d05a44635/core/blockchain.go#L1628) -> Transaction Iteration : [ Process ](https://github.com/ethereum/go-ethereum/blob/6f1fb0c29ff25318e688c15581d0c28dcefb75ce/core/state_processor.go#L60) -> txLevel STF    |      |        |            |      |

# Block Header Validation

> The process of block header validation, rigorously defined within the Yellow Paper + Spec, encompasses extensive checks, including gas usage, timestamp accuracy, among others. This meticulous validation process ensures every block strictly complies with Ethereum's stringent standards, thereby upholding the network's security and operational stability. Furthermore, it delineates the boundaries of Ethereum's economic model, integrating essential safeguards against inefficiencies and vulnerabilities. Through this process, the Ethereum network achieves a delicate balance between flexibility, allowing for evolution and upgrades, and rigidity, ensuring adherence to core principles and safety measures.

Reviewer: Some of the adjectives here just don't feel right to describe a block validation. Also, the header validation should only check the header fields - merkle root, state root, previous hash, not tx specific stuff like gas usage. That's part of the whole block
```suggestion
The process of block header validation, rigorously defined within the Yellow Paper + Spec, encompasses checks and mathematical verification of fields in the block header. This includes root hashes, gas limit, timestamp accuracy, among others. The validation process ensures every block complies with Ethereum protocol rules, refusing any invalid block and maintains the canonical chain. 
```

> The Ethereum economic model, as outlined in [EIP-1559](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1559), introduces a series of mechanisms aimed at enhancing network efficiency and stability:

Reviewer: 1559 is not the 'Ethereum economic model', that sounds quite confusing. It's transaction fee market mechanism. Also, this feel pretty off topic in this section and I am not sure if this big part of EELS doc should be dedicated just to 1559 motivation. If you wish to keep this, I will post some more comments on this

*    **Predictable Base Fee Adjustments**: EIP-1559 introduces a mechanism for predictable base fee changes, a feature particularly beneficial for wallets. This predictability aids in accurately estimating transaction costs ahead of time, streamlining the transaction creation process.
*    **Base Fee Burn and Priority Fee**: Under this model, miners are entitled to keep the priority fee as an incentive, while the base fee is burned, effectively removing it from circulation. This approach serves as a countermeasure to Ethereum's inflation, promoting a healthier economic environment by reducing the overall supply over time.

The [validity](https://github.com/ethereum/execution-specs/blob/0f9e4345b60d36c23fffaa69f70cf9cdb975f4ba/src/ethereum/shanghai/fork.py#L269) of a block header, as specified in the Yellow Paper, employs a series of criteria to ensure each block adheres to Ethereum's protocol requirements. The parent block, denoted as $P(H)$, plays a crucial role in validating the current block header $H$ . The key conditions for validity include:

> $$V(H) \equiv H_{gasUsed} \leq H_{gasLimit} \tag{57a}$$ 

Reviewer: this section does not render correctly, check the preview and adjust it please

TargetBlobGasPerBlock =  393216
$$

*    **Gas Usage**: The gas used by a block   $H_{gasUsed}$ must not exceed the gas limit $H_{gasLimit'}$, ensuring transactions fit within the block's capacity (57a).
*   **Gas Limit Constraints**: The gas limit of a block must remain within specified bounds relative to the parent block's gas limit ${P(H)_{H_{gasLimit'}}}$  , allowing for gradual changes rather than abrupt adjustments (57b, 57c).
*   **Minimum Gas Limit**: A minimum gas limit of 5000 ensures a basic level of transaction processing capacity (57d).
*   **Timestamp Verification**: Each block's timestamp $H_{timeStamp}$ must be greater than that of its parent $P(H)_{H_{timeStamp'}}$, ensuring chronological order (57e).
*   **Ancestry and Extra Data**: The block maintains a lineage through the $H_{numberOfAncestors'}$ field and limits the $H_{extraData}$ size to 32 bytes for efficiency and security (57f, 57g).
*   **Economic Model Compliance**: The base fee per gas $H_{baseFeePerGas}$ is calculated according to the rules established in EIP-1559, reflecting the network's current demand for transaction processing (57h). This along with a,b,c,d & h defines part of the Economic model

> Additional checks ensure legacy compatibility and security, such as the ommer hash  and difficulty  fields being set to predefined values, reflecting the transition from Proof of Work to Proof of Stake (57j-57l).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additional checks ensure legacy compatibility and security, such as the ommer hash  and difficulty fields being set to predefined values, reflecting the transition from Proof of Work to Proof of Stake (57j-57l).
```

> These criteria form part of the Ethereum economic model, particularly influenced by EIP-1559, which introduces a dynamic base fee mechanism. This mechanism aims to optimize network usage and fee predictability, enhancing user experience and economic stability. By examining these equations more closely, we can appreciate the intricate balance Ethereum maintains between flexibility for users and robust protocol standards.

Reviewer: again with economic model. I would move the 1559 to it's own section

<img src="images/el-architecture/rho-xi.png" width="800"/>

Impact of $\rho$ and $\xi$ on Base Fee :

-    Moment-to-Moment Analysis: Similar to our initial observations, this plot offers a granular view into how adjustments in $\rho$ and $\xi$ shape the economic model's behavior on a per-block basis, especially in the context of protocol upgrades.
-    Distinct Influence of $\rho$: Each subplot represents the nuanced effects of varying $\rho$ values. As the elasticity multiplier, $\rho$ notably shifts the inflection point in the base fee adjustment curve, highlighting its critical role in tuning the network's responsiveness to transaction volume fluctuations.
-    Interplay Between $\rho$ and $\xi$: The elasticity multiplier ($\rho$) not only moves the inflection point but also modulates the sensitivity of adjustments attributable to changes in the base fee max change denominator ($\xi$). This interaction underscores the delicate balance Ethereum maintains to ensure network efficiency and stability amidst varying demands.

<img src="images/el-architecture/gas-header.png" width="800"/>

TODO Blob fee charts

> Client Code :

Reviewer: again, I would only focus on cancun and move the client codebase references to el-client-architecture doc

| $$H_{nonce} = 0x0000000000000000 \tag{57l}$$  |       validate_header-> [ensure](https://github.com/ethereum/execution-specs/blob/9fc7925c80ff2f3949e1cc340a4a0d36fcd4161c/src/ethereum/cancun/fork.py#L328)                     | |      |        |            |      |
| $$  H_{prevRandao} = PREVRANDAO() \text{this is stale , beacon chain provides this now} $$  |       | |      |        |            |      |
| $$ H_{withdrawlsHash} \neq nil $$  |       | |      |        |            |      |
| $$ H_{blobGasUsed} \neq nil $$  |       | |      |        |            |      |
| $$ H_{blobGasUsed} \leq  MaxBlobGasPerBlock_{=786432}  $$  |       | |      |        |            |      |
| $$ H_{blobGasUsed} \% GasPerBlob_{=2^{17}} = 0 $$  |       | |      |        |            |      |
| $$ H_{excessBlobGas} = CalcExcessBlobGas(P(H)_H) $$  |  [ensure ](https://github.com/ethereum/execution-specs/blob/9fc7925c80ff2f3949e1cc340a4a0d36fcd4161c/src/ethereum/cancun/fork.py#L187)     | |      |        |            |      |

> # Block Execution Process

Reviewer: don't use multiple h1s please

Author: Shall I break the H1's into separate files ?

Reviewer: Not necessary but the doc should have a structure, e.g.:
- h1, only one main title (Execution Layers Specification)
- h2s, different parts of the client (e.g. Block validation)
- h3s, subtopics of h2s (e.g. validating individual tx)

> [!NOTE]
> This topic is open for collaboration on a separate branch

> 

Reviewer: The first header should be name of the topic with a quick intro, e.g.
# Execution Layer Specification

The EL is specified in multiple ways, in yellowpaper and executable python...

# Overview

> The Execution Layer focuses exclusively on executing the state transition function (STF). This role encompasses addressing two primary questions[¹]:

Reviewer: I would rephrase this. Maybe it makes more sense within EELS but talking about execution layer in general, it does much more than that (keeping the history, communication api for users,..)
